
# Ordinal
Consider the set $\{0, 1, 2\}$
- If that was the set of "natural number" what is the "first" (next) natural number that follows it?
	- It would be 3

This is the same idea with ordinal (which is based on natural number) where a structure has an "ordered structure" to it like first, second, third, etc. Basically, in layman's term, to represent the position of an element in a set or sequence.
- This is a generalization of ordinal numeral (first, second, third, etc. where each corresponds to a natural number, zeroth would corresponds to 0). 
- It is commonly used to represent infinity thus extending to infinite set. 

> Yes, there are different sizes of infinity. 


**Definition**: 
- Ordinal are numbers used to describe the "shape" of a well-ordering relation
	- Every well-ordering is isomorphic to an ordinal 
		- In math, isomorphic means two structures have the same structure even though they appear different on the surface. For example, {1, 2, 3} is essentially the same as {first, second, third}. The only difference lies in their naming of the elements but each element has a one to one correspondence of the other element of the other set. So, "1" would be map to "first" and so on therefore taking the inverse of {1, 2, 3} would give {first, second, third} and vice versa.
			- Basically, if you map two structures of the same type together and preserve their structure, you can reverse one structure to get the other structure through inverse mapping.
		- In the context of ordinal, isomorphic means that two well-order sets have the same "order structure" even if the elements are different so as long as the two sets are identical in their ordering. 
			- So, every well ordered set is isomorphic to an unique ordinal number just mean that we can assign an ordinal number to a well ordered set that preserve its order structure or order relation between its element.

> In simple term, isomorphic just means they have the same structure. 


## Omega

- Denoted as $\omega$
	- It is the limit ordinal or the ordinal number that represent the natural ordering of natural numbers (basically, omega represent the set of natural number in simple terms). However, this is oversimplification since omega does not only apply to natural ordering of natural numbers. 
	- Natural ordering just means $1< 2 < 3 <...$ 
		- Which means in ordinal number instead of using natural ordering I can write something like $2 < 1 <...$ under ordinal number I can do that. This is because I ordered 2 as first and 1 as second. 

>The idea is to not think ordinal number as actual numbers but rather the way how elements are ordered in their position.


To oversimplify for the sake of this being an introductory course. 
1. $\omega$ represents the natural ordering of natural number which is the limit ordinal of natural number
	1. It is the first infinite ordinal after all natural numbers therefore it is the least element that is bigger than every natural number. 
		1. Think of it like the "infinity" of natural numbers, the smallest infinity. 
	2. It is the set of all finite ordinals (natural numbers).
		1. Basically, take any smaller ordinal, in this case natural number, there is always a natural number larger than it but smaller than $\omega$. 
	3. It is the first countable element after all natural numbers that represent infinity, so the "first countable infinity".
2. Any ordinal is the set of all its preceding ordinals.
	1. Suppose, we have the set $\{0, 1, 2, 3,....\}$
	2. 3 is the ordinal number that represents $\{0, 1, 2\}$ so $3 = \{0, 1, 2\}$ 
	3. 3 is the first natural number that comes after ordinal 2. 



## Expressing Limit Ordinal

Lets express the limit ordinals. Starting with the natural ordering of natural numbers. I will express the limit with a vertical bar "|"
1. $0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,....... |$ 
	1. As we know the limit ordinal that represent the bar is $\omega$, so continuing the trend.
2. $\omega, \omega + 1, \omega + 2, \omega + 3, ......|$
	1. The limit ordinal of this is $2\omega$ because as you continue to do $\omega + 3, \omega + 4......$ it will eventually reach $\omega + \omega$ which is just $2\omega$
		1. This is technically not right it is actually $\omega * 2$ because multiplication is not commutative for ordinals but for simplicity and simplification we will just call it $2\omega$ 
	2. Basically, it is $\omega$ follow by another $\omega$ or the set of natural number follow by another set of natural number with a different naming scheme. So, it looks like $0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ....., 0', 1', 2', 3', 4'.....$ or $0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,......., \omega, \omega + 1, \omega + 2, \omega + 3, ......$ 
3. $2\omega, 2\omega + 1, 2\omega + 2, 2\omega + 3, ......|$
	1. The limit ordinal of this is $3\omega$, eventually we will reach $4\omega, 5\omega, 6\omega, ......|$
4. So, $3\omega, 4\omega, 5\omega, 6\omega, ......|$
	1. The limit ordinal of this is $\omega^2$ because eventually it will reach $\omega * \omega = \omega^2$, as you continue the trend.
5. $\omega^2, \omega^2 + 1, \omega^2 + 2, \omega^2 + 3,......|$ 
	1. The limit ordinal of this is $\omega^2 + \omega$ 
6. $\omega^2 + \omega, \omega^2 + \omega + 1, \omega^2 + \omega + 2, \omega^2 + \omega +3,......|$
	1. limit ordinal of this is $\omega^2 + 2\omega$
7. $\omega^2 + 2\omega, \omega^2 + 2\omega + 1.....|$
	1. limit ordinal of this is $\omega^2 + 3\omega$, eventually we will reach $\omega^2 + 3\omega, \omega^2 + 4\omega, ....$
8.  $\omega^2 + 3\omega, \omega^2 + 4\omega, .... |$
	1. Limit ordinal of this is $2\omega^2$ (the process for $2\omega^2$ is essentially the same as $\omega^2$ starting at step 5 to step 8) eventually we will reach $3\omega^2, 4\omega^2, ....$ 
9. $2\omega^2, 3\omega^2, 4\omega^2, .... |$
	1. Limit ordinal of this is $\omega^3$, the process repeats and we will reach $\omega^4, \omega^5, .....$ 
10. $\omega^3, \omega^4, \omega^5, .....|$ 
	1. The limit ordinal of this is $\omega^\omega$, the process repeats. 
		1. So, it will  be $\omega^\omega, \omega^\omega + 1, \omega^\omega + 2, \omega^\omega + 3..... |$ This will reach $\omega^\omega + \omega$ 
	2. After this you would need to understand your exponential rule but eventually we will reach $2\omega^\omega, 3\omega^\omega, ....$
11. $\omega^\omega, \omega^\omega, 2\omega^\omega, 3\omega^\omega, ....|$
	1. The limit ordinal of this is $\omega^{\omega + 1}$, eventually reaching $2\omega^{\omega + 1}, 3\omega^{\omega + 1}.....$ 
12. $\omega^{\omega + 1}, 2\omega^{\omega + 1}, 3\omega^{\omega + 1}.....|$
	1. Limit ordinal is $\omega^{\omega + 2}$, process repeats then eventually reaching $\omega^{\omega + 3}, \omega^{\omega + 4}, ....$ which the limit ordinal is $\omega^{2\omega}$
13. $\omega^{2\omega}, \omega^{3\omega}, ....|$
	1. Limit ordinal is $\omega^{\omega^2}$, process repeats.
14. $\omega^{\omega^2}, \omega^{\omega^3}....$
	1. Limit ordinal is $\omega^{\omega ^ \omega}$
	2. So, how do we represent this limit, well mathematicians cheated and just say it is $\epsilon_0$ (Epsilon 0), process repeats. 
	3. The limit ordinal of $\epsilon_{0}^{\epsilon_{0}^{\epsilon_0}}$ is $\epsilon_1$ and repeats.



>[!warning]- Warning! Contains Extra Information on ordinals. Read at your own risk
>
> If I have the set $\{1, 2, 3, 4,....\}$, this is the same thing as saying, in ordinal, $1 < 2< 3< 4< .....$ (based on their ordering). Suppose I take another set $\{10, 11, 12, 13,.....\}$ which is $10 < 11< 12< 13<.....$ 
>- The set $\{1, 2, 3, 4, ....\}$ has the same ordered structure as $\{10, 11, 12, 13, .....\}$, just with different element name therefore they are essentially the same thing if I just rename everything. They also have a one to one correspondence where $1 \to 10, 2 \to 11, 4 \to 12, 4 \to 13$. Taking the inverse will just reverse the arrow.
>
>Now suppose we have $\{2, 3, 4, ..., 1\}$, this the same as saying $2 < 3 < 4 <.....< 1$ but this does not have the same ordered structure as $\{10, 11, 12, 13,.....\}$ because there is an extra element in the set $\{2, 3, 4, ..., 1\}$ which is ordinal 1 (everything else got renamed so 2 is now "first" instead of 1) and we called that $\omega + 1$. We can still map them it just that the extra element 1 will not have a corresponding element mapped to it from the other set. Hence, we can denote each set as follow: 
>- $\{1, 2, 3, 4,....\} = \omega$
>- $\{10, 11, 12, 13,.....\} = \omega$
>- $\{2, 3, 4, ..., 1 \} = \omega + 1$
>	- However, this is bit confusing since we moved the number 1 to the front of the set after all the other numbers but the amount of numbers before 1 did not changed. So, this is the same as saying $\{1, 2, 3,..., 1'\}$ or $1 < 2 < 3<...< 1'$ if this makes more sense. We can also write it as $\{1, 2, 3,..., \omega \}$ instead or $1 < 2 < 3 < ... < \omega$ because remember ordinal is based on the ordering of the element position not their face value.
>
>>[!note]
>>
>>Do note operation with $\omega$ is not commutative so $1 + \omega \neq \omega + 1$ 
>>- Reason for this is 1 is a ordinal number that represent the order of type 1 so if this is the set  $\{1, 2, 3, 4,...\}$ then 1 actually just mean $\{1\}$ or $1$. Similarly, 2 just means $\{1, 2\}$ or $1 < 2$ and everything else after is just $\omega$ therefore $1 + \omega = \omega$ 
>>		- Basically, you take the ordinal 1 or 2 which are finite ordinals (they have a finite amount of elements) then add $\omega$ (infinite ordinal) after it and rename the elements which is basically just $\omega$. 
>>- While $\omega + 1$ means take the set of all finite ordinals and add an extra element after it that represent ordinal 1.
>>		- So, if $\omega$ is the infinite ordinal that represent the set of all the finite ordinals denoted as $\{1, 2, 3, .....\}$ or $1 < 2 < 3 <.....$ and ordinal 1 just represent $\{1\}$ or $1$ then we take $\omega$ then add ordinal 1 after $\omega$ and rename the element of ordinal 1. $\{1, 2, 3,..., 1'\}$ or $1 < 2 < 3<...< 1'$ 
>>- $2 * \omega = \omega$ since it is just a bunch of copies of ordinal 2 then replacing each element of $\omega$ with copies of ordinal 2 and renaming the elements. So it would be something like $\{0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, ....\}$ (although it looks like a set that contains duplicates it really doesn't since ordinal is based on the position of the element not their face value) and renaming the elements to $\{0, 0', 1, 1', 2, 2', 3, 3', ....\}$  which is really just $\omega$
>>		- You can called this the "omega copies of ordinal 2" or "copies of ordinal 2 omega times". 
>>- $\omega * 2$  is actually taking a copy of ordering type $\omega$ and duplicate it so we have two $\omega$ so something like $\{0, 1, 2, 3, ....., 0', 1', 2', 3', .....\}$
