
Accounting can be separated into two categories: Financial accounting and Managerial accounting.

# Financial vs Managerial 


## Financial accounting
Used by decision-makers outside of the company. They to communicate how well the company is doing financially to outsiders. These includes: 
- Current and potential shareholders
- Investors
- Creditors
- Managers 
- Directors 
- Employees and Job seekers: It is recommended for job seekers to look at a company annual financial report to get a good understanding of the financial situation of the company. This would also allows them to stand out from the pool of applicants if they understand a company financial situation well.
- Government
- and other users. 

## Managerial accounting
Used by decision-makers inside the company to optimize the company operation. These includes: 
- The operational team 
- Marketing team 
- Top management 
- and other teams that help keep the company functioning

# Basic Terminology

- **Corporation** is a business organization that is managed by a large number of owners but they are generally not involved in its day to day operation 

- **Shareholders or stockholders**: they are the owners of a corporation; the corporation issues shares of stock to these individuals in exchange for cash.

- **Sole proprietorship** is a business organization that has only one owner who is also in charge of its operation
	- Small family business are example of a sole proprietorship

- **Partnership** is a business organization where two or more owners are involves in the operation of the business. 

- **Creditors**: they are lenders in which businesses borrow cash from. Creditors determine the business ability to pay back the cash based on the business financial statement. The statement allows them to determines loan term, and the amount they can borrow. 

- **Suppliers**: they provide resources to the businesses they contract with. They look business financial statement to determine long-term commitment to supply-chain relationship and to establish credit sales term. 

- **Board of Director** publicly traded companies requires a board of director. Directors are elected by shareholders; they represent the shareholders interest and oversee the management of the company.

- Providing financial statement to external user is called a **disclosure**. 