


# GAAP

Stands for **Generally Accepted Accounting Principles**
- They are rule and principles in which financial statement are constructed under. 
- They are not perfect and is not complete; constantly changing 
- It allows discretion when constructing financial statement 


> Financial statement also involves many assumption and estimates


# Who sets the Rules?

The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) oversee all businesses and companies practice. They protect investors and require businesses to disclose their financial statement accurately. 
- They have the ultimate authority over financial reporting by all companies in the United States. 

Overtime they ceded some of their authority to organizations below them that sets accounting standards. They are the **Financial Accounting Standard Board** (FASB) and the **Public Company Accounting Oversight Board** (PCAOB). 
- FASB is in charge of setting GAAP standard. They have codified the standard into the FASB Accounting Standard Codification (ASC). 
- PCAOB is in charge of auditing standard. They are to monitor financial statement quality and to prevent any misleading or false information provided by company. 


>[!note] Annual and Quarterly Report
>Companies are required to file both 10-K form (Annual report) and 10-Q form (Quarterly report) on their financial statement 


# International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)

They are an international organization that sets accounting standards across countries outside of the United States. Their goal is to have an unify standards for all public companies. Currently, around 120 countries adopts this standard. 
- Established International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)


> FASA is rule-based while IASB is principle-based. 


