

# Assets

On the balance sheet they are listed in the order of liquidity (the ability to convert to cash). There are two types of assets: Current and non-current assets. 


>[!note] Cash and Cash Equivalents
>Any investments with a maturity when purchased of three month or less are considered cash equivalent by company.
>- For example, credit and debit card processed less than 7 days are classified cash and cash equivalents. 


## Current Assets

- Cash such as bank deposits, currency, and cash equivalents
	- Debit cards falls under this category 
- Marketable Securities - these are short-term investments that can be sold quickly to raise cash such as bonds, stocks, etc.. 
- Accounts receivable - the amount customers owed to the company from sales of product on credit 
	- e.g. credit card transaction 
- Inventory - goods purchases or produced for sale to customers
- Prepaid expenses - expenses that are prepaid in advance such as rent, insurance, or other services 
	- Weird one. Although it says expenses, they are current asset because you are paying something in advance. 
		- E.g. You paid your car insurance one month in advance this way you would not have to pay it next month. This is the cash you would not need to pay next month.

## Non-current Assets

- Property, plant, and equipment (PP&E) - items used for the operation of the company such as land, factory building, computers, etc..
- Intangible and other assets - Items that future benefit to the company but do not have a physical substance such as a patents, franchise rights, trademarks, etc.. 
- Long-term investments - investments in shares of other firm that management do not plan to sell in the near future.

