

# Variable for Memory Address

Rather than directly dealing with raw memory addresses, it is much easier to assign a variable that is directly associated to a memory cell. 
- Choose a name for each variable and the compiler/interpreter will automatically translate them to a memory cell/address. 

Ex: 
```c
int a = 10;
int b; 
a = 30; 
b = 40;
```


When the above code is run, the C compiler automatically assigns memory cells to variables a and b with content 30 and 40 respectively. 

>[!note]
>The exact memory address where the compiler stores the integer is not known from the source code. Like some other programming languages, C requires the type of data that the variable will hold to be declared first such as `int`. 



# Functions


## Methods vs Functions
Unlike Java which is an OOP (object-oriented programming) language, C is not intended for OOP but can be replicated. In Java, functions are called methods while in C they are just called functions. The main difference between the two lies in the way they are called and how data is passed.
- Methods are specifically tied to an instance (object) of a class therefore they are dependent on the object they are tied to (hence why Java is OOP with classes and objects). Since C does not have objects or classes, functions in C can be called independently on its own. 
- Methods implicitly pass data to be operated on by the object it was called. Since functions are independent they pass data explicitly.
- Method is a concept of OOP language.


## main function

This is similar to the main method within Java. It is the entry point of a C program, where the program begins its execution. 
- Commonly starts with the declaration type `int` (recommended) rather than `void` (not recommended).
- It is common practice to have a return statement at the end of the main function that returns a value of 0 signifying 0 errors occurring in the program. However, the main function does not need a return statement even though the declaration type is `int` which requires an integer value to be returned.
	- An error occurs if one tries to return a value for a main function that has a declaration type of `void` since `void` means no value should be returned.

Ex: 
```c
#include <stdio.h> // this is the standard C library

int main(){ 

int a = 10;
int b = 5; 

printf("%d, %d\n", a, b); // a standard print statement that formats the string before printing.

	return 0;
}
```

Output:
```bash
10, 5
```

> The `printf` statement formats the variables `a` and `b` to decimal value (hence `%d` where d stands for decimal) before substituting the value of `a` and `b` into the string. If no return statement is defined then the function will return undefined back to the host but in modern C language it returns a 0 once it hits the closing bracket. However, it is good practice to always include `return 0;` whether you are using older C or modern C. 


## Declaring function

When declaring function in C, you declared what the return type will be and the name of the function.

```c
#include <stdio.h> 

int main(){ 

int a = 10;
int b = 5; 

doSomething(a, b);

return 0;
}


void doSomething(int a, int b){ 

printf("%d, %d\n", a, b);

}
```

However, before using any functions in C, the compiler must first know the existence of the function so we must declare the function at the beginning of the program; this is to allow the compiler to check for errors to make sure the arguments are the expected type. So, modifying the code above we have:

```c
#include <stdio.h> 
void doSomething(int a, int b); // tells the compiler this function exists. 

int main(){ 

int a = 10;
int b = 5; 

doSomething(a, b);

return 0;
}


void doSomething(int a, int b){ 

printf("%d, %d\n", a, b);

}
```
Output:
```bash
10, 5
```

 
 Or, we can just initialize the function above the `main()` function. So like: 
```c

#include <stdio.h> 
void doSomething(int a, int b){ 

printf("%d, %d\n", a, b);

} // initialized it above the main 

int main(){ 

int a = 10;
int b = 5; 

doSomething(a, b);

return 0;
}

```

## Function Call Stack

Replicating the code above
```c
#include <stdio.h> 
void doSomething(int a, int b); // tells the compiler this function exists. 

int main(){ 

int a = 10;
int b = 5; 

doSomething(a, b);

return 0;
}


void doSomething(int a, int b){ 

printf("%d, %d\n", a, b);

}
```

When a C program is run it first pushes the main function onto the stack and any other functions that the program calls will also be pushed on top of the stack. For example, the above code pushes the main function onto the stack first, when it reaches the line where it calls `doSomething()`, it pushes the function `doSomething()` on top of the stack above the main function. This temporarily stops the execution of the main function and the program will start executing code in the `doSomething()` function. Once all the code in the `doSomething()` function finishes executing, it pops the function off the stack and continues its execution in the main function where it stops until the program terminates.

